New python manual (#372)
neo4j/driver-documentation: python-manual/modules/ROOT/pages/transactions.adoc

> = Fine-grained transaction control

Reviewer: This file seems to have some overlap with `python-manual/modules/ROOT/pages/query-simple.adoc` :thinking:

Author: Indeed. This is my solution to the void generated by taking away `execute_query`. Without `execute_query`, there is no way to make queries without sessions and transactions and `Result` methods. Which is a lot to internalize before running even one query. So my solution is that, in the basic workflow, we pretend that managed transactions are just a code structure (almost boilerplate code) that you have to use to run queries, with not much justification. But at least it gets you started. Then we can revise the sloppy, black-box attitude in the subsequent pages. But I think that if I were to start explaining all the content of `transactions.adoc` before being able to do `MATCH (n:Person)`, the learning curve would just be too discouraging. So I have to skip over a lot of details. But I also want both pages to be somewhat self-contained, so that you can land on either and not be required to read the other. I'll try to do some more work to cross-reference them, but I hope this explains the rationale behind it at least :)

Reviewer: That makes perfect sense. :ok_hand: People reading them in sequence will just need to skim over some parts they already know about. Better than leaving others puzzled, probably.

    people_n = session.execute_read(count_people)
----

== Session configuration

=== Database selection

It is recommended to *always specify the database explicitly* with the `database` parameter, even on single-database instances. This allows the driver to work more efficiently, as it does not have to resolve the home database first. If no database is given, the link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/operations-manual/current/manage-databases/introduction#manage-databases-default[default database] set in the Neo4j instance settings is used.

[source, python]
----
import neo4j

with driver.session(
    database="neo4j"
) as session:
    ...
----

=== Request routing

In a cluster environment, all sessions are opened in write mode, routing them to the leader. You can change this by explicitly setting the `default_access_mode` parameter to either `neo4j.READ_ACCESS` or `neo4j.WRITE_ACCESS`. Note that `execute_read` and `execute_write` automatically override the session's default access mode.

[source, python]
----
import neo4j

with driver.session(
    database="neo4j",
    default_access_mode=neo4j.READ_ACCESS
) as session:
    ...
----

[#access-control-note]
[NOTE]
====

> Although executing a _write_ query under read mode will likely result in a runtime error, *you should not rely on `execute_read/write` for access control.* The difference between the two methods is that `read` transactions will be routed to any node of a cluster, whereas `write` ones will be directed to the _Leader_. However, you should not rely on this behavior for security purposes. In fact, depending on the server version and settings, the server or cluster might allow none, some, or all write-statements to be executed even in transactions marked as _read_.

Reviewer: The above section talks about `neo4j.READ_ACCESS`/neo4j.WRITE_ACCESS` and this note jumps to `execute_read/write`. While the same thing applies to both, this might not be evident to a newcomer reding this.

Author: Agreed. Clarified.

[source, python]
----
with driver.session(
    database="neo4j",
    impersonated_user="somebody_else"
) as session:
    ...
----

When impersonating a user, the query is run within the complete security context of the impersonated user and not the authenticated user (i.e., home database, permissions, etc.).

[#explicit-transactions]
== Explicit transactions

You can have full control over transactions by manually beginning one with the method link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/api/python-driver/current/api.html#neo4j.Session.begin_transaction[`Session.begin_transaction()`]. You run queries inside an explicit transaction with the method link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/api/python-driver/current/api.html#neo4j.Transaction.run[`Transaction.run()`].

[source,python]
----

> with driver.session() as session:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with driver.session(database="neo4j") as session:
```
not necessary, but having the people copy paste snippets that implement best practices seems like a good idea to me.

    with session.begin_transaction() as tx:
        # use tx.run() to run queries
----

Closing an explicit transaction can either happen automatically at the end of a `with` block, or can be explicitly controlled through the methods link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/api/python-driver/current/api.html#neo4j.Transaction.commit[`Transaction.commit()`], link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/api/python-driver/current/api.html#neo4j.Transaction.rollback[`Transaction.rollback()`], or link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/api/python-driver/current/api.html#neo4j.Transaction.close[`Transaction.close()`].

Explicit transactions are most useful for applications that need to distribute Cypher execution across multiple functions for the same transaction, or for applications that need to run multiple queries within a single transaction but without the automatic retries provided by managed transactions.

[source,python]
----
import neo4j

> from os import sleep

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from time import sleep

import neo4j
```

            try:
                decrease_customer_balance(tx, customer_id, amount)
                tx.commit()
            except Exception as e:
                request_inspection(customer_id, other_bank_id, amount, e)
                raise  # roll back
        finally:
            tx.close()  # rolls back if not yet committed

def customer_balance_check(tx, customer_id, amount):
    query = ("MATCH (c:Customer {id: $id}) "
             "RETURN c.balance >= $amount AS sufficient")
    result = tx.run(query, id=customer_id, amount=amount)
    record = result.single(strict=True)
    return record["sufficient"]

def other_bank_transfer_api(customer_id, other_bank_id, amount):
    ...  # make some API call to other bank

def decrease_customer_balance(tx, customer_id, amount, attempts=3):
    query = ("MATCH (c:Customer {id: $id}) "
             "SET c.balance = c.balance - $amount")
    try:
        result = tx.run(query, id=customer_id, amount=amount)
    # if error is transient, attempt to retry the query after short delay
    except (DriverError, Neo4jError) as e:
        if e.is_retryable() and attempts > 0:
            sleep(1)

>             decrease_customer_balance(tx, customer_id, amount, attempts=attempts-1)

Reviewer: This will most likely not work because a failed `tx.run` will kill the transaction. You'd have to start a new transaction.

Author: Ah, good point! I didn't test this because I needed to fill in some gaps, but I guess I'll have to and adjust it accordingly. Thanks

= Run your own transactions

> When xref:query-simple.adoc[querying the database] with transaction functions, the driver automatically creates a *<<transaction>>*. You can easily include multiple queries in a single transaction function, but to design more involved use-cases it is important to understand how transactions work within the driver.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When xref:query-simple.adoc[querying the database] with transaction functions, the driver automatically creates a *<<transaction>>*. 
You can easily include multiple queries in a single transaction function, but to design more involved use-cases it is important to understand how transactions work within the driver.
```

== Obtain a session

> Before running a transaction, you need to obtain a _session_. Sessions act as concrete query channels between the driver and the server. In particular, sessions borrow connections from the _connection pool_ as needed, and ensure <<causal consistency>> is enforced.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before running a transaction, you need to obtain a _session_. 
Sessions act as concrete query channels between the driver and the server. 
In particular, sessions borrow connections from the _connection pool_ as needed, and ensure <<causal consistency>> is enforced.
```

> Sessions are created with the method link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/api/python-driver/current/api.html#session[`Driver.session()`], with the keyword argument `database` allowing to specify the xref:_database_selection[target database]. For further parameters, see xref:_session_configuration[Session configuration].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sessions are created with the method link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/api/python-driver/current/api.html#session[`Driver.session()`], with the keyword argument `database` allowing to specify the xref:_database_selection[target database]. For further parameters, see xref:_session_configuration[Session configuration].
```
```suggestion
Sessions are created with the method link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/api/python-driver/current/api.html#session[`Driver.session()`], with the keyword argument `database` allowing to specify the xref:_database_selection[target database]. 
For further parameters, see xref:_session_configuration[Session configuration].
```

[source,python]
----
with driver.session(database="neo4j") as session:
    ...
----

> Session creation is a lightweight operation, so sessions can be created and destroyed without significant cost. Always xref:_close_sessions[close sessions] when you are done with them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Session creation is a lightweight operation, so sessions can be created and destroyed without significant cost. 
Always xref:_close_sessions[close sessions] when you are done with them.
```

*Sessions are _not_ thread safe*: share the main `Driver` object across threads, but make sure each thread creates its own sessions.

[#managed-transactions]
== Run a managed transaction

> A transaction can contain any number of queries. As Neo4j is <<ACID>> compliant, *queries within a transaction will either be executed as a whole or not at all*: you cannot get a part of the transaction succeeding and another failing. Use transactions to group together related queries which work together to achieve a single _logical_ database operation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A transaction can contain any number of queries. 
As Neo4j is <<ACID>> compliant, *queries within a transaction are either executed as a whole or not at all*: you cannot get a part of the transaction succeeding and another failing. 
Use transactions to group together related queries which work together to achieve a single _logical_ database operation.
```

> A managed transaction is created with the methods link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/api/python-driver/current/api.html#neo4j.Session.execute_read[`Session.execute_read()`] and link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/api/python-driver/current/api.html#neo4j.Session.execute_write[`Session.execute_write()`], depending on whether you want to retrieve data from the database or alter it. Both methods take a _transaction function_ callback *(1)* and an arbitrary number of positional and keyword arguments *(2)* which are handed down to the transaction function. The transaction function *(3)* is responsible for actually carrying out the queries and processing the result. Queries are specified with the link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/api/python-driver/current/api.html#neo4j.Transaction.run[`Transaction.run()`] method *(4)*, which returns a link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/api/python-driver/current/api.html#neo4j.Result[`Result`] object. You can then xref:result#manipulate-result[process the result] *(5)* using any of the `Result` methods, or simply casting it to list.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A managed transaction is created with the methods link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/api/python-driver/current/api.html#neo4j.Session.execute_read[`Session.execute_read()`] and link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/api/python-driver/current/api.html#neo4j.Session.execute_write[`Session.execute_write()`], depending on whether you want to retrieve data from the database or alter it. 
Both methods take a _transaction function_ callback *(1)* and an arbitrary number of positional and keyword arguments *(2)* which are handed down to the transaction function. 
The transaction function *(3)* is responsible for actually carrying out the queries and processing the result. 
Queries are specified with the link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/api/python-driver/current/api.html#neo4j.Transaction.run[`Transaction.run()`] method *(4)*, which returns a link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/api/python-driver/current/api.html#neo4j.Result[`Result`] object. 
You can then xref:result#manipulate-result[process the result] *(5)* using any of the `Result` methods, or simply casting it to list.
```

.Retrieve people whose name starts with `Al`.
[source,python]
----
def match_person_nodes(tx, name_filter): # <3>
    result = tx.run(""" # <4>
        MATCH (p:Person) WHERE p.name STARTS WITH $filter
        RETURN p.name as name ORDER BY name
        """, filter=name_filter)
    return list(result)  # return a list of Record objects # <5>

with driver.session(database="neo4j") as session:
    people = session.execute_read(
        match_person_nodes, # <1>
        "Al", # <2>
    )
    for person in people:
        print(person.data())  # obtain dict representation
----

> *Do not hardcode or concatenate parameters directly into the query*. Use xref:query-simple#query-parameters[query parameters] instead, both for performance and security reasons.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*Do not hardcode or concatenate parameters directly into the query*. 
Use xref:query-simple#query-parameters[query parameters] instead, both for performance and security reasons.
```

> *Transaction functions should never return the `Result` object directly*. Instead, always xref:result.adoc[process the result] in some way; at minimum, cast it to list. Within a transaction function, a `return` statement results in the transaction being committed, while the transaction is automatically rolled back if an exception is raised.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*Transaction functions should never return the `Result` object directly*. 
Instead, always xref:result.adoc[process the result] in some way; at minimum, cast it to list. 
Within a transaction function, a `return` statement results in the transaction being committed, while the transaction is automatically rolled back if an exception is raised.
```

        LIMIT 1
    """)
    org = result.single()

    if org is not None and org["employees_n"] == 0:
        raise Exception("Most recent organization is empty.")
        # Transaction will roll back -> not even Person is created!

    # If org does not have too many employees, add this Person to that
    if org is not None and org.get("employees_n") < employee_threshold:
        result = tx.run("""
            MATCH (o:Organization {id: $org_id})
            MATCH (p:Person {name: $name})
            MERGE (p)-[r:WORKS_FOR]->(o)
            RETURN $org_id AS id
            """, org_id=org["id"], name=name
        )

    # Otherwise, create a new Organization and link Person to it
    else:
        from neo4j.time import Date
        result = tx.run("""
            MATCH (p:Person {name: $name})
            CREATE (o:Organization {id: randomuuid(), created_date: datetime()})
            MERGE (p)-[r:WORKS_FOR]->(o)
            RETURN o.id AS id
            """, name=name, date=Date.today()
        )

    # Return the Organization ID to which the new Person ends up in
    return result.single()["id"]

if __name__ == "__main__":
    main()
----

> Should a transaction fail for a reason that the driver deems transient, it will automatically retry to run the transaction function (with an exponentially increasing delay). For this reason, *transaction functions must be _idempotent_* (i.e., they should produce the same effect when run several times), because you do not know upfront how many times they are going to be executed. In practice, this means that you should not edit nor rely on globals, for example. Note that although transactions functions might be executed multiple times, the queries inside it will always run only once.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Should a transaction fail for a reason that the driver deems transient, it automatically retries to run the transaction function (with an exponentially increasing delay). 
For this reason, *transaction functions must be _idempotent_* (i.e., they should produce the same effect when run several times), because you do not know upfront how many times they are going to be executed. 
In practice, this means that you should not edit nor rely on globals, for example. 
Note that although transactions functions might be executed multiple times, the queries inside it are always run only once.
```

A session can chain multiple transactions, but *only one single transaction can be active within a session at any given time*. To maintain multiple concurrent transactions, use multiple concurrent sessions.

[#unit_of_work-decorator]
=== Further transaction function configuration

The decorator link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/api/python-driver/current/api.html#neo4j.unit_of_work[`unit_of_work()`] allows to exert further control on transaction functions. It allows to specify:

> - a transaction timeout (in seconds). Transactions that run longer will be terminated by the server. The default value is set on the server side.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- a transaction timeout (in seconds). 
Transactions that run longer are terminated by the server. 
The default value is set on the server side.
```

> - a dictionary of metadata that gets attached to the transaction. These metadata get logged in the server `query.log`, and are visible in the output of the `SHOW TRANSACTIONS` Cypher command. Use this to tag transactions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- a dictionary of metadata that gets attached to the transaction. 
These metadata get logged in the server `query.log`, and are visible in the output of the `SHOW TRANSACTIONS` Cypher command. 
Use this to tag transactions.
```

[source,python]
----
from neo4j import unit_of_work

@unit_of_work(timeout=5, metadata={"app_name": "people"})
def count_people(tx):
    result = tx.run("MATCH (a:Person) RETURN count(a) AS people")
    record = result.single()
    return record["people"]

with driver.session(database="neo4j") as session:
    people_n = session.execute_read(count_people)
----

[#explicit-transactions]
== Run an explicit transaction

> You can achieve full control over transactions by manually beginning one with the method link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/api/python-driver/current/api.html#neo4j.Session.begin_transaction[`Session.begin_transaction()`]. You run queries inside an explicit transaction with the method link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/api/python-driver/current/api.html#neo4j.Transaction.run[`Transaction.run()`].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can achieve full control over transactions by manually beginning one with the method link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/api/python-driver/current/api.html#neo4j.Session.begin_transaction[`Session.begin_transaction()`]. 
You run queries inside an explicit transaction with the method link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/api/python-driver/current/api.html#neo4j.Transaction.run[`Transaction.run()`].
```

                request_inspection(customer_id, other_bank_id, amount, e)
                raise  # roll back
        finally:
            tx.close()  # rolls back if not yet committed

def customer_balance_check(tx, customer_id, amount):
    query = ("""
        MATCH (c:Customer {id: $id})
        RETURN c.balance >= $amount AS sufficient
    """)
    result = tx.run(query, id=customer_id, amount=amount)
    record = result.single(strict=True)
    return record["sufficient"]

def other_bank_transfer_api(customer_id, other_bank_id, amount):
    ...  # make some API call to other bank

def decrease_customer_balance(tx, customer_id, amount):
    query = ("""
        MATCH (c:Customer {id: $id})
        SET c.balance = c.balance - $amount
    """)
    result = tx.run(query, id=customer_id, amount=amount)
    result.consume()

def request_inspection(customer_id, other_bank_id, amount, e):
    # manual cleanup required; log this or similar
    print("WARNING: transaction rolled back due to exception:", repr(e))
    print("customer_id:", customer_id, "other_bank_id:", other_bank_id,
          "amount:", amount)

----

== Session configuration

=== Database selection

> It is recommended to *always specify the database explicitly* with the `database` parameter, even on single-database instances. This allows the driver to work more efficiently, as it does not have to resolve the home database first. If no database is given, the link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/operations-manual/current/manage-databases/introduction#manage-databases-default[default database] set in the Neo4j instance settings is used.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is recommended to *always specify the database explicitly* with the `database` parameter, even on single-database instances. 
This allows the driver to work more efficiently, as it does not have to resolve the home database first. 
If no database is given, the link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/operations-manual/current/manage-databases/introduction#manage-databases-default[default database] set in the Neo4j instance settings is used.
```

[source, python]
----
import neo4j

with driver.session(
    database="neo4j"
) as session:
    ...
----

=== Request routing

> In a cluster environment, all sessions are opened in write mode, routing them to the leader. You can change this by explicitly setting the `default_access_mode` parameter to either `neo4j.READ_ACCESS` or `neo4j.WRITE_ACCESS`. Note that `.execute_read()` and `.execute_write()` automatically override the session's default access mode.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In a cluster environment, all sessions are opened in write mode, routing them to the leader. 
You can change this by explicitly setting the `default_access_mode` parameter to either `neo4j.READ_ACCESS` or `neo4j.WRITE_ACCESS`. Note that `.execute_read()` and `.execute_write()` automatically override the session's default access mode.
```

[source, python]
----
import neo4j

with driver.session(
    database="neo4j",
    default_access_mode=neo4j.READ_ACCESS
) as session:
    ...
----

[#access-control-note]
[NOTE]
====

> Although executing a _write_ query under read mode will likely result in a runtime error, *you should not rely on this for access control.* The difference between the two modes is that _read_ transactions will be routed to any node of a cluster, whereas _write_ ones will be directed to the leader. Still, depending on the server version and settings, the server might allow none, some, or all _write_ statements to be executed even in _read_ transactions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Although executing a _write_ query in read mode likely results in a runtime error, *you should not rely on this for access control.* 
The difference between the two modes is that _read_ transactions are routed to any node of a cluster, whereas _write_ ones are directed to the leader. 
Still, depending on the server version and settings, the server might allow none, some, or all _write_ statements to be executed even in _read_ transactions.
```

Similar remarks hold for the `.execute_read()` and `.execute_write()` methods.
====

[#impersonation]
=== Run queries as a different user (impersonation)

> You can execute a query under the security context of a different user with the parameter `impersonated_user`, specifying the name of the user to impersonate. For this to work, the user under which the `Driver` was created needs to have the link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/cypher-manual/current/access-control/dbms-administration#access-control-dbms-administration-impersonation[appropriate permissions]. Impersonating a user is cheaper than creating a new `Driver` object.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can execute a query under the security context of a different user with the parameter `impersonated_user`, specifying the name of the user to impersonate. 
For this to work, the user under which the `Driver` was created needs to have the link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/cypher-manual/current/access-control/dbms-administration#access-control-dbms-administration-impersonation[appropriate permissions]. 
Impersonating a user is cheaper than creating a new `Driver` object.
```

[source, python]
----
with driver.session(
    database="neo4j",
    impersonated_user="somebody_else"
) as session:
    ...
----

When impersonating a user, the query is run within the complete security context of the impersonated user and not the authenticated user (i.e., home database, permissions, etc.).

== Close sessions

> Each connection pool has *a finite number of sessions*, so if you open sessions without ever closing them, your application could run out of them. It is thus recommended to create sessions using the `with` statement, which automatically closes them when the application is done with them. When a session is closed, it is returned to the connection pool to be later reused.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each connection pool has *a finite number of sessions*, so if you open sessions without ever closing them, your application could run out of them. 
It is thus recommended to create sessions using the `with` statement, which automatically closes them when the application is done with them. 
When a session is closed, it is returned to the connection pool to be later reused.
```
